Delta tracking (#3971)
openmc-dev/openmc: docs/source/methods/neutron_physics.rst

collision is sampled with Equation :eq:`sample-distance-2`. Then, the distance
to the nearest surface from the particle position along its current trajectory
is computed (discussed in the :ref:`methods_geometry` section). If the distance
to the nearest surface is smaller than the distance to the next collision, the
sampled distance is not statistically valid. The particle is moved to the
surface and is considered to be contained by the next geometric region. Cross
sections are recomputed, and a new distance to the next collision is sampled
with Equation :eq:`sample-distance-2`. This process repeats until the distance
to the next collision is smaller than the distance to the nearest surface,
which is when a collision is accepted. This procedure is known as surface
tracking.

Surface tracking is quite efficient when used in problems with short mean free
paths relative to the size of individual regions in the problem geometry.
Surface tracking also admits the use of the track length estimator (discussed
in the :ref:`methods_tallies` section). In problems with many geometric regions
across particle flights, surface tracking will require a large number of surface

> distance calculations and collision distance samples. The cost of finding the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the :ref:`methods_tallies` section). In problems with long mean free paths relative to the size of geometry regions, surface tracking will require a large number of surface distance calculations per collision. The cost of finding the
```

nearest surface is also non-trivial for problems that contain many geometric
regions at the same cell level (e.g. TRISO-fueled fission reactors).

.. _delta_tracking:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Delta Tracking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The disadvantages of surface tracking for certain classes of problems motivates
the development of alternative approaches which do not require distance
to surface checks. Delta tracking (also known by Woodcock tracking,
delta scattering, and null scattering) is one approach to
avoid surface geometry queries [Woodcock]_. In delta tracking, the domain is
homogenized by adding a fictitious delta scattering cross sections
:math:`\Sigma_{\delta}(\mathbf{r}, E)` to the medium. The sum of the delta
scattering cross section and the total cross section is known as the majorant

> cross section (:math:`\Sigma_{maj}(E)`)

Reviewer: While accurate, I'm finding the presentation of the majorant a little confusing. I think it might be best to first describe it as computed in practice -- as the maximum total cross section of all materials over a spatial domain. I think this makes it easier to explain why the computation of surface crossings is no longer neccesary to advance the particle.

Later it can be mentioned that computation of the majorant is technically arbitrary as long as it is large enough to ensure correct rejection sampling of collisions, but that the choice of material maxima is an efficient selection.

Author: This is fair. I've changed up the documentation to start with a description of the majorant as its computed. This is then followed up with a description based on the delta scatter reaction to motivate rejection sampling.

.. math::
    :label: majorant-xs-1

    \Sigma_{maj}(E) = \Sigma_{t}(\mathbf{r}, E) + \Sigma_{\delta}(\mathbf{r},
    E),

which is computed as the maximum macroscopic total cross section over the
spatial domain

.. math::
    :label: majorant-xs-2

    \Sigma_{maj}(E) = \max_{\mathbf{r}}\left(\Sigma_{t}(\mathbf{r}, E)\right).

The delta tracking procedure computes the distance to the next collision
with the majorant cross section instead of the total cross section

.. math::
    :label: sample-distance-maj

    \ell = -\frac{\ln \xi}{\Sigma_{maj}(E)}.

This is followed by a rejection sampling test to determine if a real
collision or a delta scattering collision occured at this delta collision
point. A random number :math:`\xi` on the interval :math:`[0,1)` is drawn and
used to check

.. math::
    :label: delta-real-collision

    \xi < \frac{\Sigma_t (\mathbf{r}, E)}{\Sigma_{maj} (E)}.

> If the condition is true, the collision is accepted as real. If the condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the condition above is true, the collision is accepted as real. If the condition
```

> is false, a delta scatter event has occured and the particle continues along

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is false, a delta scatter event (also referred to as a virtual collision)  has occurred and the particle continues along
```

its trajectory with the same energy and direction. Boundary conditions
are applied by testing the distance to the nearest external boundary and
comparing this to the distance sampled with Equation :eq:`sample-distance-maj`.
If the distance to the nearest boundary is less than the sampled distance to
the next collision, the particle crosses the external boundary.

> Delta tracking is advantageous compared to surface tracking as it allows

Reviewer: I would place this first point later in the paragraph to make for an easier contrast of the methods based on the points outlined above for surface tracking.

Author: Works for me!

for continuously-varying material properties due to the use of pointwise
cross section samples in Equation :eq:`delta-real-collision`. Delta tracking
often performs better than surface tracking in problems where the particle
mean free path is larger than the distance between surfaces. Problems
containing small regions with large total cross sections (such as burnable
absorbers) will have majorant cross sections several orders of magnitude
larger than the total cross section over the majority of the domain
[Leppänen]_. This decreases the number of accepted collisions, and therefore
the effectiveness of delta tracking. Material discontinuities are not
considered in delta tracking, which prohibits the use of track length

> estimators and forces the use of the higher-variance collision estimator

Reviewer: Maybe we want to clarify that detla tracking prohibits the use of track-length estimators for geometric/material domains, but that it's possible valid for some other spatial tallies (i.e. mesh tallies).

Author: Added some clarification for that.

> estimators and forces the use of the higher- variance collision estimator

Reviewer: Maybe we can clarify that this is not technically necessary for all tallies but is currently true for this implementation.
